---
title: "Attractive electron–electron interactions within robust local fitting approximations"
description: "The impredictable fatal failure of an algorithm that remarkably reduces the complexity and speed-up of many-body methods in simulating molecular systems, ... which gives precious insight on many standard methods!"
layout: minimal_publication
school: "University of Oslo"
journal: "Journal of computational chemistry"
academic: true
file: "JCompChem_1-11_2013.pdf"
#categories: "Data Analysis" Ethics Privacy CivicTech IoT "Smart Cities" Telecom "Data Science" Visualization "Data Processing" Tools
#tags: Spark Kafka Zookeeper "Jupyter/iPython Notebook" Pandas 
categories: Academic "Computational Chemistry" Algorithm
tags: Academic "Computational Chemistry" "Exchange Energy Contribution" "Coulomb Energy Contribution" Algorithm
---


Simulating molecules is demanding. *Ab-inito* molecular calculations are today and probably for decennies still be limited by time and computer ressources.

A big part of the computation is usually spent in calculating the interactions between electron orbitals which translates in maths into integrals. Among them, the quadrupole integrals are the most "expensive" ones, and their number grows exponentially with the number of atoms.

One domain of computational chemistry is to overcome this issue to be able to simulate larger and larger molecules. Typically the solutions either compute those integrals faster, or discard the ones whose contribution is negligeable. In this article about our algorithm, "PARI", we do both by approximating the quadrupole integrals by a few more (double and triple) "simpler integrals".

This allows the computation to be faster and to discard many of those expensive integrals half-way to their full calculation. Even though this method is super efficient and reasonably accurate, we also proved mathematically that one foundation of such a rough approximation may lead to non-physical behavior, unfortunately! This clearly limits its use as it is, but we are proud to have explained a misbehavior that has been around for years in many older methods and wrongly associated with computer bugs. 

Today our PARI algorithm has been re-used by other scientists to approximate half of the contribution for which the non-physical behavior is not an issue: a success coming from a failure :) 



### Abstract

An analysis of Dunlap's robust fitting approach reveals that the resulting two-electron integral matrix is not manifestly positive semidefinite when local fitting domains or non-Coulomb fitting metrics are used. We present a highly local approximate method for evaluating four-center two-electron integrals based on the resolution-of-the-identity (RI) approximation and apply it to the construction of the Coulomb and exchange contributions to the Fock matrix. In this pair-atomic resolution-of-the-identity (PARI) approach, atomic-orbital (AO) products are expanded in auxiliary functions centered on the two atoms associated with each product. Numerical tests indicate that in 1\% or less of all Hartree-Fock and Kohn-Sham calculations, the indefinite integral matrix causes nonconvergence in the self-consistent-field iterations. In these cases, the two-electron contribution to the total energy becomes negative, meaning that the electronic interaction is effectively attractive, and the total energy is dramatically lower than that obtained with exact integrals. In the vast majority of our test cases, however, the indefiniteness does not interfere with convergence. The total energy accuracy is comparable to that of the standard Coulomb-metric RI method. The speed-up compared with conventional algorithms is similar to the RI method for Coulomb contributions; exchange contributions are accelerated by a factor of up to eight with a triple-zeta quality basis set. A positive semidefinite integral matrix is recovered within PARI by introducing local auxiliary basis functions spanning the full AO product space, as may be achieved by using Cholesky-decomposition techniques. Local completion, however, slows down the algorithm to a level comparable with or below conventional calculations.

### Citation

    @article{
        author = {Merlot, Patrick and Kjaergaard, Thomas and Helgaker, Trygve and Lindh, Roland and Aquilante, Francesco and Reine, Simen and Pedersen, Thomas Bondo},
        title = {Attractive electron-electron interactions within robust local fitting approximations.},
        journal = {Journal of computational chemistry},
        year = {2013}
        month = apr,
        pages = {1--11},
        pmid = {23553369},
        url = {http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23553369},
        doi = {10.1002/jcc.23284},
        issn = {1096-987X},
    }

